# Introduction and Essential Concepts
system software: `lives at low level and interacts directly with kernel and core system libraries.`

`Unix systems` : originally developed (`1970`) AT&T Labs, commercial vendors, require licenses. Solaris, sunOS, etc
`Windows systems`: licensed OS developed (`1985`) by microsoft.
`Linux systems` : Open source unix (`1990`) like systems with lots of variants. Ubuntu, Debian, Arch Linux, etc


There are three cornerstones to system programming in Linux.
1. Systems calls
2. C library
3. C Complier

`System programming starts with systems calls.`

`System calls are function invocations made from user space into kernel in order to request some service or resource from the OS.`
such as : read(), write(), get_tread_area(), set_tid_address()

`Each machine architecture implements its own list of available system calls.`

The application tells the kernel which system call to execute with what parameters via machine registers. system calls are denoted by number, starting at 0.

`As a system programmer, usually you not need any knowledge of know the kernel handles system call invocation handled automatically by Complier and C library.`

Programmers are naturally interested in ensuring their programs run on all of systems that they have promised to support, now and in the future.

At the system level:
There are two sets od definitions and descriptions that impact portability.
1. `API`
2. `ABI`

## Application Programming Interface (API)
The interfaces by which one piece of software (functions) communicates with another set at the source level. (Standards)

## Application Binary Interface (ABI)
Defines the low-level binary interface between two or more pieces of software on a particular architecture.
`It defines how an application interacts with inself, kernel and with libraries.`

`ABI insures binary compatibility`

ABI enforced by the toolchain - the complier, the linker, etc..
Each machine architecture has its own ABI on Linux.

`ABIs are concerned with issues such as calling conventions, byte ordering, register use, system call invocation, linking, library behavior and the binary object format.`

## Standards
`POSIX and SUS document the C API for a UNIX-like OS interface.`
They define system programming for unix-like systems.

# Concepts of Linux Programming
1. File and Filesystem
2. Processes
3. Users and Groups
4. Permissions
5. Signals
6. IPC
7. Headers
8. Error Handling
## Files and Filesystem
Linux follows the `everything-is-a-file philosophy.`
Consequently, much interaction transpires via reading of and writing to files.
In order to be accessed, a file must first be opened. A open file is referenced via a unique descriptor, inside the kernel this descriptor is handled by an integer called the file descriptor(fd). file descriptors are shared with user space and are used by user programs to access files.

### Regular Files (Array of Bytes)
A regular file contains byte of Data, organized into a linear array called a `byte stream.`
file position or file offset is a metadata that a kernel associates with each open file.
when file first opened, the file position is zero.
the file position's maximum value is bounded only by the size of the C type used to store it. (64-bit).
the size of file is measured in bytes, is the number of bytes in the linear array that make up the file.
A single file can be opened more the once, by a different or even the same process. Each open instance of a file is given a unique fd. Processes can share their file descriptors. user space programs must co-ordinate among themselves to ensure that concurrent file access are sufficiently synchronized.

Although files are usually accessed via filenames, they actually are not directly associated with such names. Instead a file is referenced by an `inode` which is unique numerical value, and stores metadata associated with a file but no filename!
the inode is both a physical object located on disk in filesystem and a conceptual entity represented by a data structure in the Linux kernel.

### Directories and Links
Accessing a file via its inode number is cumbersome(difficult), so files are always opened form user space by a name.

Directory: is any normal file, with the different that it contains only a mapping of names to inode. The Kernel directly uses this mapping to perform name-to-inode resolutions.
`Kernel does not allow directory to be opened and manipulated ke regular file. they must be manipulated by system calls.`

### Hard Links(same filesystem)
When multiple links(paths) map different names to the same inode, we call them hard links.
Deleting a  file involves unlinking it from the directory structure, which is done my removing its name and pair from a directory. each inode contains link count, unlinking(Deleting) decrements link count, when link count reaches zero, the inode and its associated data removed from filesystem.

### Symbolic links
Hard link can not span filesystem, because an inode is meaningless outside of the inode's own filesystem.
To allow links that cab span filesystem, Symbolic links are implemented.

### Special Files
Special files are Kernel objects that are represented as files.
1. Block Device
2. Character Device
3. named Pipes
4. Sockets

Linux provides system call to create a special file.
Device access in Unix systems is performed via Device files.

`Character Device:` A Character device is accessed as linear queue of bytes.  The device driver places the bytes onto the queue, one by one, and user space reads the bytes in the order that they where placed on the queue. `Keyboard Device`

`Block Device:` A Block device is accessed as an array of bytes. The device driver maps the bytes over a seekable device, and user space is free to access any valid bytes in the array,in any order.`Hard Disk, floppy Disk, CD-ROM drives, flash memory etc.`

`Named Pipes:` are an IPC mechanism that provides a communication channel over a file descriptor accessed via a special file.
Regular pipes are the method used to `pipe` the output of one program into the input of another program. they are created in-memory and do not exists on  any filesystem.

`Named pipes act like regular pipes but are accessed via a file called a FIFO special file. unrelated process can access this file and communicate.`

`Sockets: `Sockets are an Advanced form of IPC that allow for communication b/w tow different processes not only on the same machine but on two different machines `sockets form basic of network and internet programming`.

### filesystem and namespaces
`On Unix the namespace is unified`

A filesystem is a collection of files and Directories in a formal and valid hierarchy.
Filesystem may be individually added to and removed form the global namespace of files and Directories. These operations called mounting and unmounting.

`Each filesystem is mounted to a special location in the namespace called as a mount point. the root directory of filesystem is then accessible at this mount point.`

Filesystem usually exists physically(i.e. stored on disk), Although linux also support virtual filesystem, network filesystem.
physical filesystem resides on Block storage devices. such as CDs, floppy disks, hard drive, etc.
some of such devices are partionable which means they can be devided into multiple filesystems, all of which can be mounted individually.
Linux supports filesystem : media-specific filesystem(ISO9660), NFS, ext3, ext4, XFS, FAT etc.

the smallest addressable unit on a block device is the sector. Sectors come in various power of two, with 512 bytes being common,`A block device can not transfer or acccess a unit of data smaller than a sector, all I/O occurs in term of one or more sectors.`

Likewise the smallest unit of a filesystem is `block`. a block is usually power of two multiple of the sector size lesser than page size.
common block size 512bytes, 1KB, 4KB.

`Historically, ` Unix have only a single shared namespace, viewable by all users and all processes on the system.
`Linux` supports per-process namespaces, allowing each process to optionally have a unique view of the system's file an directory hierarchy.
`By default each process inherits the namespace of its parent, but a process may elect to create its own namespace with its own set of mount points, and a unique root directory`

## Processes
Processes are object code in execution: active, alive, running programs. but they consists of data, resources, state, and a virtualized computer.

The process begin life as executable object code, which is machine runnable code in an executable format that kernel understands(ELF).
The executable format contains metadata, multiple sections of code and data.
`Sections are linear chunks of the object code that load into linear chunks of memory. All bytes in sections treated the same, given same permissions, and generally used for similar purposes.`

The common sections are `text section, data section, bss section.`

`text section: ` text section contain executable code and read only data such has constant variable. marked readable and executable.
`data section: ` data section contains initialized data, marked as readable and writable.
`BSS section: ` bss section contains uninitialized global data.
`absolute section: ` absolute section contains nonrelocatable symbols.

`Processes request and manipulate resources only through system calls. resources include timers, pending signals, open files, network connections, hardware, and IPC mechanisms.`

A process's resources, along with data and statics related to the process, are stored inside the kernel in the process's process descriptor.

### Threads
Each process consists of one or more threads.
A thread consists od a stack(which stores local variables), processor state, and a current location in the object code.
`the majority of remaining parts of a process are shared among all threads.`

### Process Hierarchy
Each process is identified by a unique positive integer called the process ID(pid).
pid of first process is 1 (called init process).
Processes form a strict hierarchy, known as process tree. the process three is rooted at first process(init process) which is typically the init program.
`New process are created by fork() system call. this system call creates duplicate of the calling process. the original process is called parent and new process is called child. Every process has a parent, if a parent process terminates before its child, the kernel will re-parent the child to init process.`

when a process terminates, it is not immediately removed from the system. Instead, the kernel keeps parts of process resident in memory to allow the process' parent to inquire about its status upon  terminating this is known as `waiting on the terminated process`. Once the parent process has waited o its terminated child, the child is fully destroyed.

`A process that has terminated, but not yet been waited upon, is called a zombie process`

`The init process waits on all of its children, ensuring that re-parented do not remains zombies forever.`


## Users and Groups
Authorization in Linux is provided by users and groups.
`Each user is associated with a unique positive integer called tie user ID (uid), Each process is associated with exactly one uid (real uid). uid 0 is associated with root user. Each process also has an effective uid, a saved uid, and a filesystem uid.`

`real uid: ` user who started the process.
`effective uid: `effective uid may change under various rules to allow a process to execute with the rights of different users.
`saved  uid: ` stores the original effective uid.
`filesystem uid: ` is used for verifying filesystem access.

`Each user may belong to one or more groups. similar to user id, process is associated with group id.`


## Permissions
`Each file is associated with an owning user, an owning group,mand set of permission bits. The bits describe the ability of owning user, the owning group ad everybody to read, write, and execute the file.`

r -> read
w -> write
x -> execute

## Signals
`Signals are a mechanism for one-way asynchronous notifications.`
A signal may be sent from kernel to process, from process to another process, or from process to itself. `Signal alert a process to some event.`

The Linux kernel implements about 30 Signals.

Process can elect to explicitly ignore or handle signals. Ignored signal dropped silently. Handled signals cause the execution of a user-supplied signal handler function.  The program jumps to this function as soon as the signal is received and (when signal handler returns) the control of the program resumes at the previously interrupted instruction.

## IPC
1. Pipes
2. Names Pipes
3. Semaphores
4. Message queue
5. Shared memory
6. Futexes

## Error handling
```cpp
if(fsync (fd) == -1)
{
  int err = errno;
  fprintf (stderr, "fsync failed: %s\n", strerror(err));
  if(err == EIO)
  {
    /* if the error is I/O related, jump ship */
    fprintf (stderr, "I/O error on %d!\n", fd);
    exit (EXIT_FAILURE)
  }
}



























