# FIle I/O
before a file can be read from or written to, it must be opened first.
kernel maintains a per-process list of open files called the file table.
table is indexed via unsigned integer knowns as file descriptors.
Each entry is list contains info about open file, a pointer to an in-memory copy of the file's backing inode and associated metadata.
`By default a child process receives a copy of its parent's file table.`
Every process has at least three file descriptors open : 0, 1, and 2.
file descriptors` STDIN_FILENO 0, STDOUT_FILENO 1, and STDERR_FILENO 2` is stdin, stdout, stderr respectively.

file descriptors can reference more than just regular fils. They are used for accessing device files and pipes, directories, and futexes, FIFOs, and sockets.

## Opening Files
Basic method of accessing a file is via the read() and write() syscalls. Before a file can be accessed, it must be opened via an open() or creat() system calls. once done using the file, it should be closed using the system calls close().

### open()
```cpp
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/stat.h>
#include <fctl.h>

int open(const char *name, int flags);
int open(const char *name, int flags, mode_t mode);
```
The open() system call maps the file given by the pathname to a file descriptor, which it returns on success.
The file position is set to zero, and the file is opened for access according to the flags given by flags.

#### Flags for open()
The flags argument must be one of O_RDONLY, O_WRONLY, O_RDWR.
A flags argument can be bitwise-ORed with one or more of the following values.
1. `O_APPEND` : The file will be opened in append mode, before each write the file offset will be updated to EOF.
2. `O_ASYNC` : A signal(SIGIO by default) will be generated when the specified file becomes readable or writeable. `available only for terminals and sockets not for regular file!`
3. `O_CREAT` : A file denoted by name does not exist, the kernel will create it, if file already exists, this flag has no effect unless O_EXCL is also given. must provide mode.
4. `EXCL` : When given with `O_CREAT` this flag will cause the call to open() to fail if the file already exists. This is used to prevent race conditions on file creation.
5. `O_DIRECT` : the file will be opened for direct I/O.
6. `O__DIRECTORY` : if name is not a directory the call to open() will fail. this flag is used internally by the opendir() library function.
7. `O_LARGEFILE` : the given file will be opened using 64-bit offsets. allowing files larger than 2GB to be opened.
8. `O_NOCTTY` : if the given name refers to a terminals device(/dev/tty) it will not become the process' controlling terminal. even if the process does not currently have a controlling terminal. this flag is not used frequently.
9. `O_NOFOLLOW` : if name is symbolic link, the call to open() will fail.
10. `O_NOBLOCK` : if possible the file will be opened in non-blocking mode, Neither the open() nor any other operation will cause the process to block(sleep) on the I/O. This behavior may be defined only for FIFOs.
11. `O_SYNC` : The file will be opened for synchronous I/O. No write operation will complete until the data bas been physically written to the disk. Normal read operations are already synchronous so this flag has no effect on read.
12. `O_TRUNC` : if the file exists, it is a regular file, and the given flags allow for writing, the file will be truncated to zero length.

`uid of the file's owner is the effective uif od the process creating the file.`

#### Permissions
mode argument is ignored until a file is created. it is required if O_CREAT is given.
1. `S_IRWXU` : Owner has read write and execute permission.
2. `S_IRUSR` : Owner has read permission.
3. `S_IWUSR` : Owner has write permission.
4. `S_IXUSR` : Owner has Execute permission.
5. `S_IRWXG` : Group has read write and execute permission
6. `S_IRGRP` : Group has read permission
7. `S_IWGRP` : Group has write permission
8. `S_IXGRP` : Group has execute permission
9. `S_IRWXO` : everyone has read write and execute permission
10. `S_IROTH` : everyone has read permission
11. `S_IWOTH` : everyone has write permission
12. `S_IXOTH` : everyone has execute permission

### creat()
  ```cpp
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/stat.h>
#include <fctl.h>

int creat(const char *name, mode_t mode);
/* it is identical with */
int fd = open(file, O_WONLY | O_CREAT | O_TURNC, 0644);
```
#### return and error code
both creat() and open() return fd on success, -1 on failure.
response will be use diff filename or terminate the program.

### read()
```cpp
#include <unistd.h>
ssize_t read(int fd, void *buf, size_t len);

```
Each call reads up to `len` bytes into the buffer from the current file offset of the file referenced by `fd` and returns the number of bytes written into the buffer on error the call returns -1 and errno is set. The file position is advanced by the number of bytes read from fd.

Example:
```cpp
unsigned long word;
ssize_t nr;
/* read a couple of bytes into word from fd */
nr = read(fd, &word, sizeof(unsigned long));
if(nr == -1)
{
  /*read failed*/
  perror("read");
  exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}
```
There are two problems.
1. Error handle
2. call might return without reading all len bytes.
#### Return values
It is legal for read() to return a positive nonzero value less than len. this can happen for a number of reasons. `less than len bytes may have been available, the system call may have interrupted by signal, the pipe maby have broken (if fd is pipe) and so on.`

```cpp
ssize_t ret;
while(len != 0 && (ret = read(fd, buf, len)) ! = 0)
{
  if(ret == -1)
  {
    if(errno == EINTR)
      continue;
    perror("read");
    break;
  }
  len -= ret;
  buf += ret;
}
```

for non-blocking mode.
```cpp
char buf[BUFSIZE];
ssize_t nr;
fd = open(name, O_NOBLOCK);
start:
nr = read(fd, buf, BUFSIZE);
if(nr == -1)
{
  int err = errno;
  if(err == EINTR)
  {
    goto start;
  }
  if(err == EAGAIN)
  {
    /*resubmit again no data available now*/
  }
  else
  {
    perror("read");
  }
}

```
### write()
```cpp
#include <unistd.h>
ssize_t write(int fd, const void *buf, size_t count);
```
A call to write() writes up to count bytes starting at buf to the current file position of the file referenced by the file descriptor fd.
On success returns number of bytes written and file offset is updated. on error returns -1.

```cpp
const char *buf = "My ship is solid!";
ssize_t nr;
nr = write(fd, buf, strlen(buf));
if(nr == -1)
{
  perror("write");
}
```
`There can be partial write.`
```cpp
ssize_t ret, nr;
while(len != 0 && (ret = write(fd, buf, len)) != 0)
{
  if(ret == -1)
  {
    int err = errno;
    if(err = EINTR)
    {
      continue;
    }
    perror("write");
    break;
  }
  len -= ret;
  buf += ret;
}
```
when fd is opened in append mode (O_APPEND) write occurs at the current EOF. 

## Synchronized I/O
```cpp
if(fsync(fd) == -1)
{
  int err = errno;
  if(err = EINVAL)
  {
    if(fdatasync(fd) == -1)
    {
      perror("fdatasync");
    }
  }
  else
  {
    perror("fsync");
  }
}
```
### close()
```cpp
#include <unistd.h>
int close(int fd);
```

### lseek()
```cpp
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>
off_t lseek(int fd, off_t pos, int origin);
```
origin can be one of below
`SEEK _CUR` : current value + pos
`SEEK_END` : current length + pos
`SEEK_SET` : current offset set to pos.
the call returns the new file position on success.
### pread() and pwrite() 
does not change current offset value.
```cpp
#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500
#include <unistd.h>
ssize_t pread(int fd, void *buff, size_t count, off_t pos);
ssize_t pwrite(int fd, const void *buf, size_t count, off_t pos);
``` 
### truncating file
file must be open in writable mode
```cpp
#include <unistd.h>
int ftruncate(int fd, off_t len);
int truncate(const char *path, off_t len);
```

## Multiplexed I/O
Multiplexed I/O allows an application to concurrently block on multiple file descriptor, and receive notification when any one of them become ready to read or write without blocking.
1. Multiplexed I/O : tell me when any of these file descriptors are ready for I/O
2. sleep until one or more file descriptors are ready.
3. woken up : what is ready?
4. Handle all file descriptors ready for I/O, without blocking I/O
5. Go back to step 1, and start over.

Linux provides three multiplexed I/O solutions.
1. select
2. poll
3. epoll

## select()



